Intentional weight loss is the loss of total body mass as a result of efforts to improve fitness and health, or to change appearance through slimming.
Weight loss in individuals who are overweight or obese can reduce health risks, increase fitness, and may delay the onset of diabetes.
It could reduce pain and increase movement in people with osteoarthritis of the knee.
Weight loss can lead to a reduction in hypertension (high blood pressure), however whether this reduces hypertension-related harm is unclear.
Weight loss occurs when the body is expending more energy in work and metabolism than it is absorbing from food or other nutrients.
It will then use stored reserves from fat or muscle, gradually leading to weight loss.
For athletes seeking to improve performance or to meet required weight classification for participation in a sport, it is not uncommon to seek additional weight loss even if they are already at their ideal body weight.
Others may be driven to lose weight to achieve an appearance they consider more attractive.
Being underweight is associated with health risks such as difficulty fighting off infection, osteoporosis, decreased muscle strength, trouble regulating body temperature and even increased risk of death.
Low-calorie diets are also referred to as balanced percentage diets.
Due to their minimal detrimental effects, these types of diets are most commonly recommended by nutritionists.
In addition to restricting calorie intake, a balanced diet also regulates macronutrient consumption.
From the total number of allotted daily calories, it is recommended that 55% should come from carbohydrates, 15% from protein, and 30% from fats with no more than 10% of total fat coming from saturated forms.
For instance, a recommended 1,200 calorie diet would supply about 660 calories from carbohydrates, 180 from protein, and 360 from fat.
Some studies suggest that increased consumption of protein can help ease hunger pangs associated with reduced caloric intake by increasing the feeling of satiety.
Calorie restriction in this way has many long-term benefits. After reaching the desired body weight, the calories consumed per day may be increased gradually, without exceeding 2,000 net (i.e. derived by subtracting calories burned by physical activity from calories consumed).
Combined with increased physical activity, low-calorie diets are thought to be most effective long-term, unlike crash diets, which can achieve short-term results, at best.
Physical activity could greatly enhance the efficiency of a diet.
The healthiest weight loss regimen, therefore, is one that consists of a balanced diet and moderate physical activity.